.\" https://man.openbsd.org/mdoc.7
.Dd 2026-03-20
.Dt DNSTT-CLIENT 1
.Os


.Sh NAME

.Nm dnstt-client
.Nd DNS tunnel client


.Sh SYNOPSIS

.Nm
.Op Fl doh Ar URL | Fl dot Ar ADDR | Fl doq Ar ADDR | Fl udp Ar ADDR | Fl auto
.Op Fl pubkey Ar HEX | Fl pubkey-file Ar FILENAME
.Ar DOMAIN
.Ar LOCALADDR : Ns Ar LOCALPORT


.Sh DESCRIPTION

.Nm
is the client portion of a DNS tunnel.
It receives TCP connections at
.Ar LOCALADDR : Ns Ar LOCALPORT
and forwards them,
encoded as a sequence of DNS messages
and via a recursive resolver,
to an instance of
.Xr dnstt-server 1
running as the authoritative name server for
.Ar DOMAIN .
The DNS messages may be carried over
DNS over HTTPS (DoH),
DNS over TLS (DoT),
DNS over QUIC (DoQ),
or classical DNS over UDP.

.Pp
You must use one of
.Fl doh ,
.Fl dot ,
.Fl doq ,
.Fl udp ,
or
.Fl auto ,
to specify what form of DNS to use:

.Bl -tag

.It Fl doh Ar URL
Use DNS over HTTPS.
.Ar URL
is the URL of the DNS over HTTPS resolver,
including the
.Ql /dns-query
path if used by the resolver.

.It Fl doh-addr Ar ADDR : Ns Ar PORT
Override the TCP address used to dial the DoH server,
instead of resolving the host from
.Fl doh
URL.
Requires
.Fl doh .
Useful for certificate-pinning scenarios or when DNS is not available.

.It Fl dot Ar ADDR : Ns Ar PORT
Use DNS over TLS.
.Ar PORT
is normally 853.

.It Fl doq Ar ADDR : Ns Ar PORT
Use DNS over QUIC (RFC 9250).
.Ar PORT
is normally 853.

.It Fl udp Ar ADDR : Ns Ar PORT
Use DNS over UDP.
.Ar PORT
is normally 53.

.Pp
With
.Fl udp ,
you have the option of communicating directly with an instance of
.Xr dnstt-server 1 ,
without going through a recursive resolver.

.It Fl auto
Automatically select the best available transport by trying DoQ, DoT, DoH,
and UDP in order and using the first one that succeeds.
At least one of
.Fl doq ,
.Fl dot ,
.Fl doh ,
or
.Fl udp
must also be specified to supply addresses.

.El

.Pp
You must use one of
.Fl pubkey
or
.Fl pubkey-file
to specify the server's public key,
which is used for authenticating the server and end-to-end encrypting the
channel.
The public key is generated by
.Ql dnstt-server -gen-key .

.Bl -tag

.It Fl pubkey Ar HEX
.Ar HEX
is a string of 64 hexadecimal digits.

.It Fl pubkey-file Ar FILENAME
.Ar FILENAME
is the name of a file containing
64 hexadecimal digits and an optional trailing newline character.

.El


.Sh OPTIONS

.Bl -tag

.It Fl auto
See
.Sx DESCRIPTION .

.It Fl auth-token Ar HEX
Send a 32-byte (64 hex digit) authentication token to the server after
the Noise handshake.
The server must be configured with
.Fl auth-keys
pointing to a file containing this token.
If omitted, no token is sent and any server without an auth-keys file
will accept the connection.

.It Fl compress
Enable zlib compression on tunnel streams.
Both client and server must have
.Fl compress
set for compression to work.

.It Fl config Ar FILE
Load flag defaults from a configuration file before parsing command-line
flags.
Command-line flags always override file values.
The file format is
.Ql key=value
lines with
.Ql #
comments.

.It Fl debug-addr Ar ADDR : Ns Ar PORT
Listen for HTTP connections at this address and expose
.Pa /debug/vars
and
.Pa /debug/pprof
endpoints.
Intended for development and troubleshooting only; do not expose publicly.

.It Fl fec-data Ar N
Enable Reed-Solomon forward error correction with
.Ar N
data shards.
Must be combined with
.Fl fec-parity .
Requires matching settings on the server.
0 disables FEC.

.It Fl fec-parity Ar N
Number of FEC parity shards.
0 disables FEC.

.It Fl kcp-mode Ar MODE
Control KCP reliability/latency tradeoff.
.Ar MODE
is one of:
.Bl -tag -compact
.It Cm fast
Low latency, higher CPU and bandwidth.
.It Cm normal
Balanced default.
.It Cm slow
Conserves bandwidth, higher latency.
.El

.It Fl log-level Ar LEVEL
Minimum log level to emit.
.Ar LEVEL
is one of
.Cm debug ,
.Cm info ,
.Cm warn ,
or
.Cm error .
Default is
.Cm info .

.It Fl multipath
Use all configured transports simultaneously.
Packets are sent on all transports and received from whichever arrives
first.
Requires at least two of
.Fl doh ,
.Fl dot ,
.Fl udp
(DoQ is not supported in multipath mode).
Boosts resilience and throughput at the cost of bandwidth.

.It Fl obfuscate
Interleave decoy AAAA queries with the tunnel's TXT queries to make
traffic patterns less distinctive.

.It Fl pin-cert Ar PINS
Comma-separated list of TLS certificate pins in the form
.Cm SHA256:<64-hex-digits> .
If any pin is provided, only certificates whose SHA-256 fingerprint
matches one of the pins will be accepted.
Applies to DoT, DoH, and DoQ connections.

.It Fl rotate-id Ar N
Rotate the ClientID every
.Ar N
minutes.
This changes the tunneling identity visible to the resolver and helps
evade long-term traffic correlation.
0 (the default) disables rotation.

.It Fl utls Oo
.Op Ar weight Ns Sy * Ns
.Ar label
.Oc Ns Op , Ns ...
Choose a TLS client hello fingerprint from a weighted distribution.
.Nm
uses uTLS to disguise its TLS handshake.
The argument is a comma-separated list of labels,
each optionally preceded by an integer weight and
.Sy * .
If a weight is omitted it defaults to 1.

.Pp
Examples:
.Bl -item -offset indent -compact
.It
-utls '3*Firefox,2*Chrome,1*iOS'
.It
-utls Firefox
.It
-utls random
.It
-utls none
.El

.Pp
The special value
.Cm random
selects a randomized fingerprint.
The special value
.Cm none
disables uTLS and uses the native Go TLS fingerprint.
Run
.Nm Fl help
to see the default distribution and all available labels.

.It Fl help
Print usage and list available
.Fl utls
fingerprint labels.

.El


.Sh EXAMPLES

Tunnel through a DoH resolver to an authoritative server for
.Cm t.example.com ,
listening locally at
.Cm 127.0.0.1:7000 :

.Bd -literal -offset indent
dnstt-client -doh https://resolver.example/dns-query \e
    -pubkey-file server.pub t.example.com 127.0.0.1:7000
.Ed

.Pp
Tunnel through a DoT resolver:

.Bd -literal -offset indent
dnstt-client -dot resolver.example:853 \e
    -pubkey 14ca15f53660e248d289d9302f992c4bee518f2361d6343dafa7b417b5a3d752 \e
    t.example.com 127.0.0.1:7000
.Ed

.Pp
Auto-select best transport, with DoQ and DoT as candidates:

.Bd -literal -offset indent
dnstt-client -auto -doq resolver.example:853 -dot resolver.example:853 \e
    -pubkey-file server.pub t.example.com 127.0.0.1:7000
.Ed

.Pp
Multipath over DoH and DoT simultaneously:

.Bd -literal -offset indent
dnstt-client -multipath \e
    -doh https://resolver.example/dns-query \e
    -dot resolver.example:853 \e
    -pubkey-file server.pub t.example.com 127.0.0.1:7000
.Ed


.Sh DIAGNOSTICS

.Nm
writes structured logs to standard error.
At startup it logs the effective MTU, the chosen transport, and the
uTLS fingerprint (if applicable):

.Dl effective MTU 128

The MTU varies with the length of
.Ar DOMAIN .


.Sh SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS

The
.Fl udp
option is not covert;
it sends plaintext DNS messages that reveal the use of a DNS tunnel
by their special format.
Only
.Fl doh ,
.Fl dot ,
and
.Fl doq
provide transport-layer privacy.

Even with encrypted transports,
an observer may infer the existence of a tunnel from traffic metadata.
The recursive resolver can always see the plaintext of DNS queries.

Regardless of the transport,
the tunnel content is end-to-end encrypted and server-authenticated using
the Noise_NK protocol.
The server's public key must be obtained via a trusted out-of-band channel.


.Sh SEE ALSO

.Xr dnstt-server 1

.Lk https://www.bamsoftware.com/software/dnstt/


.Sh AUTHORS

.An David Fifield Aq Mt david@bamsoftware.com
