.\" https://man.openbsd.org/mdoc.7
.Dd 2026-03-20
.Dt DNSTT-SERVER 1
.Os


.Sh NAME

.Nm dnstt-server
.Nd DNS tunnel server


.Sh SYNOPSIS

.Nm
.Fl gen-key
.Op Fl privkey-file Ar FILENAME
.Op Fl pubkey-file Ar FILENAME

.Nm
.Fl udp Ar ADDR : Ns Ar PORT
.Op Fl privkey Ar HEX | Fl privkey-file Ar FILENAME
.Op Fl socks5 | Ar DOMAIN Ar UPSTREAMADDR : Ns Ar UPSTREAMPORT
.Op Fl options...


.Sh DESCRIPTION

.Nm
is the server portion of a DNS tunnel.
It receives DNS over UDP messages at
.Ar ADDR : Ns Ar PORT ,
decodes the streams they contain,
and forwards them as TCP connections to
.Ar UPSTREAMADDR : Ns Ar UPSTREAMPORT .
When
.Fl socks5
is given, it acts as a SOCKS5 proxy instead.

.Nm
acts as the authoritative name server for
.Ar DOMAIN
and communicates with an instance of
.Xr dnstt-client 1
via a recursive resolver.

.Ss GENERATING A SERVER KEYPAIR

The tunnel uses end-to-end Noise_NK encryption authenticated by the server's
public key.
Generate a keypair with the
.Fl gen-key
option.

.Bl -tag

.It Fl gen-key
Generate a new server keypair.
Without
.Fl privkey-file
or
.Fl pubkey-file ,
prints both keys to standard output.

.It Fl privkey-file Ar FILENAME
With
.Fl gen-key ,
save the generated private key to
.Ar FILENAME
(mode 0400).
In server mode, read the private key from
.Ar FILENAME .

.It Fl pubkey-file Ar FILENAME
With
.Fl gen-key ,
save the generated public key to
.Ar FILENAME .
Not valid in server mode.

.El

.Pp
On the server you only need the private key;
.Nm
derives the public key automatically.
Give the public key to clients via
.Fl pubkey
or
.Fl pubkey-file .


.Sh OPTIONS

.Bl -tag

.It Fl udp Ar ADDR : Ns Ar PORT
Listen for incoming DNS queries at the given UDP address.
.Ar PORT
must be 53 when operating through a recursive resolver,
unless you have arranged to forward port 53 to another port.
Required in server mode.

.It Fl privkey Ar HEX
Server private key as a string of 64 hexadecimal digits.

.It Fl mtu Ar BYTES
Maximum size of UDP DNS response payloads in bytes.
Default is 1232 (the DNS Flag Day 2020 recommended minimum).
Reduce this if resolvers on the path only support smaller payloads
(error message:
.Dl FORMERR: requester payload size 512 is too small (minimum 1232) ).

.It Fl socks5
Act as a SOCKS5 proxy.
In this mode
.Ar UPSTREAMADDR
is omitted from the command line.
Each tunnel stream performs a SOCKS5 handshake; the server connects to
the address requested by the client.
Only
.Cm CONNECT
with no authentication is supported.

.It Fl auth-keys Ar FILE
Path to a file of authorized 32-byte client tokens, one token per line,
each as 64 hexadecimal digits.
When set, clients must supply a matching token (via
.Xr dnstt-client 1
.Fl auth-token )
after the Noise handshake or they are rejected.
If this option is omitted, no token check is performed.

.It Fl compress
Enable zlib compression on tunnel streams.
Must match the client's
.Fl compress
setting.

.It Fl config Ar FILE
Load flag defaults from a YAML configuration file before parsing
command-line flags.
Command-line flags always override file values.
Keys in the YAML file correspond to flag names
.Pq e.g. Ql udp: ":53" .

.It Fl debug-addr Ar ADDR : Ns Ar PORT
Listen for HTTP connections at this address and expose
.Pa /debug/vars
and
.Pa /debug/pprof
endpoints.
Intended for development and troubleshooting only; do not expose publicly.

.It Fl fec-data Ar N
Enable Reed-Solomon forward error correction with
.Ar N
data shards.
Must be combined with
.Fl fec-parity .
Requires matching settings on the client.
0 disables FEC (default).

.It Fl fec-parity Ar N
Number of FEC parity shards.
0 disables FEC (default).

.It Fl kcp-mode Ar MODE
Control KCP reliability/latency tradeoff.
.Ar MODE
is one of:
.Bl -tag -compact
.It Cm fast
Low latency, higher CPU and bandwidth.
.It Cm normal
Balanced default.
.It Cm slow
Conserves bandwidth, higher latency.
.El

.It Fl log-level Ar LEVEL
Minimum log level to emit.
.Ar LEVEL
is one of
.Cm debug ,
.Cm info ,
.Cm warn ,
or
.Cm error .
Default is
.Cm info .

.It Fl paranoia
Return plausible-looking fake DNS responses to non-tunnel queries.
This hides the presence of the tunnel from observers who can see the
plaintext DNS traffic arriving at the server.

.It Fl rate-limit Ar RATE
Maximum DNS queries per second per client (token bucket rate).
0 (the default) disables rate limiting.
Use with
.Fl rate-burst .

.It Fl rate-burst Ar N
Burst allowance for
.Fl rate-limit .
Default is 50.

.El


.Sh EXAMPLES

Generate a keypair and save to files:

.Bd -literal -offset indent
dnstt-server -gen-key -privkey-file server.key -pubkey-file server.pub
.Ed

.Pp
Run the server, forwarding streams to a local HTTP proxy at port 8000:

.Bd -literal -offset indent
dnstt-server -udp :53 -privkey-file server.key t.example.com 127.0.0.1:8000
.Ed

.Pp
Run as a SOCKS5 proxy (client decides the destination):

.Bd -literal -offset indent
dnstt-server -udp :53 -privkey-file server.key -socks5 t.example.com
.Ed

.Pp
Run with per-client rate limiting and token authentication:

.Bd -literal -offset indent
dnstt-server -udp :53 -privkey-file server.key \e
    -rate-limit 20 -rate-burst 100 \e
    -auth-keys /etc/dnstt/tokens.txt \e
    t.example.com 127.0.0.1:8000
.Ed

.Pp
Load configuration from a YAML file:

.Bd -literal -offset indent
dnstt-server -config /etc/dnstt/server.yaml t.example.com 127.0.0.1:8000
.Ed


.Sh DIAGNOSTICS

.Nm
writes structured logs to standard error.
At startup it logs its public key and the effective MTU:

.Dl pubkey 14ca15f53660e248d289d9302f992c4bee518f2361d6343dafa7b417b5a3d752
.Dl effective MTU 932

The public key string can be used with
.Fl pubkey
in
.Xr dnstt-client 1 .

If the recursive resolver's stated maximum UDP payload size is smaller than the
.Fl mtu
value,
.Nm
logs:

.Dl FORMERR: requester payload size 512 is too small (minimum 1232)

Reduce
.Fl mtu
to the requester's advertised payload size to resolve this.


.Sh SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS

The private key file should be protected with mode 0400 and accessible only
to the user running
.Nm .
The
.Fl gen-key
option creates the private key file with this mode automatically.

Token authentication
.Pq Fl auth-keys
restricts access to pre-authorized clients.
Without it, any client that knows the server's public key can use the tunnel.

The
.Fl paranoia
option reduces passive detectability but does not provide strong protection
against an active adversary probing the server.


.Sh SEE ALSO

.Xr dnstt-client 1

.Lk https://www.bamsoftware.com/software/dnstt/


.Sh AUTHORS

.An David Fifield Aq Mt david@bamsoftware.com
